# dbsi-project
Comparison SQL Query Execution Time Prediction using BERT with Classical Neural Networks and Semantic Search with Vector Index 

Query optimization is a vast and actively researched field within databases, and if we could accurately predict the execution time of a query without looking at the query plan, this information could be fed back to the query optimizer to improve its results. The first step in doing so would be to be able to predict SQL query execution time. There are several approaches to this that can be found in the literature, but leveraging recent advancements in generative AI is a new subtopic that the community has developed interest in recently. 

The goal of this project is to compare predictiction accuracy of SQL Query Execution times using classical NLP approaches such as BERT with xgboost or dense neural network classifiers with recent advancements in Generative AI. More specifically, we use semantic search on PostgreSQL query plans to identify the plans that are most similar to a given query. 

The first step is to collect data that will be used to create the vector embeddings. While there are a number of ways to do this in PostgreSQL, auto_explain was the most attractive one since I wanted to extract queries, query plans and query durations for a large number of queries. auto_explain is a shared loadable library that ships with PostgreSQL source code and allows the duration of each executed query and its query plan to be logged. This is enabled by setting the following configuration parameters:
shared_preload_libraries = 'auto_explain'       
auto_explain.log_min_duration = 0
auto_explain.log_format = JSON
log_destination = 'stderr,csvlog'
logging_collector = on 

The next step was to create a sample dataset, run some queries and let PostgreSQL generate the auto_explain logs. I picked the standard pgbench benchmark for this purpose. I generated data with a scale factor of 10,000 and executed a balanced read/write workload benchmark. The logs generated from this execution were used for the next step.

The next part can be summarised as follows can be summarized as follows:

Preprocessing the generated log file to produce the dataset in its required form.
Split the generated data into two parts: 80% would be used as training data and 20% would be used as test data.

For classical regression techniques:
Use BERT Sentence Transformer to extract features and vectorize the input queries and query plans. The vectorized data can now be used for prediction using different regression algorithms. 
SVR - Try different kernels such linear, polynomial, sigmoid, rbf, etc. for support vector regression.
XGBoost - Xgboost uses a set of random forest based models to predict the a numerical value. I tried varying the number of predictive models that the algorithm would use.
Feedforward neural network - defined a simple 3 layer dense neural network using Keras. Tried varying the batch size and number of training epochs. 

For semantic search with vector index:
Pick the correct embeddings to use. I used the default all-MiniLM-L6-v2 embeddings that LangChain provides. 
Create a GPTVectorStoreIndex(provided by Llama Index) using 80% of the query execution data.
Query the index using a retriever and find the K most similar vectors matching a query. Choose the average of the execution times of the K data points as the predicted value. 

The best results in terms of Coefficient of Determination(R Squared Error) for each method(obtained after varying hyperparameters) are summarized below:
1. Support Vector Regression - 0.33
2. XGBoost - 0.56
3. Dense, Feed-forward Neural Network - 0.63
4. Semantic Search with Vector Index - 0.54

We see that the accuracy of the classical approach of using BERT sentence transformers to generate embeddings and using a relatively simple 3 layer dense neural network to predict SQL query latency performs better than that of using embeddings generated by LLMs. Overall the maximum achieved R-squared error is 0.63 which indicates that there are opportunities to build on this work further. 

This problem by nature is not an easy prediction problem as it is hard to predict the query execution time without actually executing the query. The state of the various internal components of the database such as the buffer cache and the storage manager is determined not just by an individual query but by the workload’s access patterns. Exposing the model to some of these components and their interactions may help in improving our results in the future.  

The file 'query_latency_semantic_search.py' contains the main code used for processing raw log files and creating a vector search index and testing its accuracy. 
The file 'query_latency_bert_regression.py' contains the code for processing raw log files, creating custom embeddings of the query plans using BERT as the feature extractor and predicting query latency using a number of different classical regression techniques such as dense neural networks, xgboost and support vector regression.

The postgresql_config directory contains the PostgreSQL configuration file for the instance of Postgres that was used for data collection. 
A sample raw log output file is present in the sample_log_file directory.

All the dependencies for the projects are mentioned in requirements.txt

Future Work:

There are several directions which can be explored as to build on this work:

1. Postgres query plans are actually collected as JSON documents, but the current model treats them as unstructured text. Creating a structure-aware vector index which understands and learns from the semi-structured format of JSON documents can provide better search results. 

2. Use BERT alternatives such as XLNet and RoBERTa or even older approaches such as bag of words. 

4. Integrate these capabilities into EvaDB. The entire workflow right now is standalone and operates outside of EvaDB, but if we can develop an accurate query execution time prediction model, it can be integrated with EvaDB.  
